doc/USING.rst, before:

.. _usage-docs:

Using a Pre-trained Model
=========================

Inference using a DeepSpeech pre-trained model can be done with a client/language binding package. We have four clients/language bindings in this repository, listed below, and also a few community-maintained clients/language bindings in other repositories, listed `further down in this README <#third-party-bindings>`_.

* `The C API <c-usage>`.
* :ref:`The Python package/language binding <py-usage>`
* :ref:`The Node.JS package/language binding <nodejs-usage>`
* :ref:`The command-line client <cli-usage>`
* :github:`The .NET client/language binding <native_client/dotnet/README.rst>`

.. _runtime-deps:

Running ``deepspeech`` might, see below, require some runtime dependencies to be already installed on your system:

* ``sox`` - The Python and Node.JS clients use SoX to resample files to 16kHz.
* ``libgomp1`` - libsox (statically linked into the clients) depends on OpenMP. Some people have had to install this manually.
* ``libstdc++`` - Standard C++ Library implementation. Some people have had to install this manually.
* ``libpthread`` - On Linux, some people have had to install libpthread manually. On Ubuntu, ``libpthread`` is part of the ``libpthread-stubs0-dev`` package.  
* ``Redistribuable Visual C++ 2015 Update 3 (64-bits)`` - On Windows, it might be required to ensure this is installed. Please `download from Microsoft <https://www.microsoft.com/download/details.aspx?id=53587>`_.

Please refer to your system's documentation on how to install these dependencies.

.. _cuda-deps:

CUDA dependency
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The GPU capable builds (Python, NodeJS, C++, etc) depend on the same CUDA runtime as upstream TensorFlow. Currently with TensorFlow 2.2 it depends on CUDA 10.1 and CuDNN v7.6. `See the TensorFlow documentation <https://www.tensorflow.org/install/gpu>`_.

Getting the pre-trained model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you want to use the pre-trained English model for performing speech-to-text, you can download it (along with other important inference material) from the DeepSpeech `releases page <https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases>`_. Alternatively, you can run the following command to download the model files in your current directory:

.. code-block:: bash

   wget https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases/download/v0.7.4/deepspeech-0.7.4-models.pbmm
   wget https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases/download/v0.7.4/deepspeech-0.7.4-models.scorer

Model compatibility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

DeepSpeech models are versioned to keep you from trying to use an incompatible graph with a newer client after a breaking change was made to the code. If you get an error saying your model file version is too old for the client, you should either upgrade to a newer model release, re-export your model from the checkpoint using a newer version of the code, or downgrade your client if you need to use the old model and can't re-export it.

.. _py-usage:

Using the Python package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Pre-built binaries which can be used for performing inference with a trained model can be installed with ``pip3``. You can then use the ``deepspeech`` binary to do speech-to-text on an audio file:

For the Python bindings, it is highly recommended that you perform the installation within a Python 3.5 or later virtual environment. You can find more information about those in `this documentation <http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/dev/virtualenvs/>`_.

We will continue under the assumption that you already have your system properly setup to create new virtual environments.

Create a DeepSpeech virtual environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In creating a virtual environment you will create a directory containing a ``python3`` binary and everything needed to run deepspeech. You can use whatever directory you want. For the purpose of the documentation, we will rely on ``$HOME/tmp/deepspeech-venv``. You can create it using this command:

.. code-block::

   $ virtualenv -p python3 $HOME/tmp/deepspeech-venv/

Once this command completes successfully, the environment will be ready to be activated.

Activating the environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each time you need to work with DeepSpeech, you have to *activate* this virtual environment. This is done with this simple command:

.. code-block::

   $ source $HOME/tmp/deepspeech-venv/bin/activate

Installing DeepSpeech Python bindings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once your environment has been set-up and loaded, you can use ``pip3`` to manage packages locally. On a fresh setup of the ``virtualenv``\ , you will have to install the DeepSpeech wheel. You can check if ``deepspeech`` is already installed with ``pip3 list``.

To perform the installation, just use ``pip3`` as such:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install deepspeech

If ``deepspeech`` is already installed, you can update it as such:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install --upgrade deepspeech

Alternatively, if you have a supported NVIDIA GPU on Linux, you can install the GPU specific package as follows:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install deepspeech-gpu

See the `release notes <https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases>`_ to find which GPUs are supported. Please ensure you have the required `CUDA dependency <#cuda-dependency>`_.

You can update ``deepspeech-gpu`` as follows:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install --upgrade deepspeech-gpu

In both cases, ``pip3`` should take care of installing all the required dependencies. After installation has finished, you should be able to call ``deepspeech`` from the command-line.

Note: the following command assumes you `downloaded the pre-trained model <#getting-the-pre-trained-model>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

   deepspeech --model deepspeech-0.7.4-models.pbmm --scorer deepspeech-0.7.4-models.scorer --audio my_audio_file.wav

The ``--scorer`` argument is optional, and represents an external language model to be used when transcribing the audio.

See :ref:`the Python client <py-api-example>` for an example of how to use the package programatically.

.. _nodejs-usage:

Using the Node.JS / Electron.JS package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can download the JS bindings using ``npm``\ :

.. code-block:: bash

   npm install deepspeech

Please note that as of now, we support:
 - Node.JS versions 4 to 13.
 - Electron.JS versions 1.6 to 7.1

TypeScript support is also provided.

Alternatively, if you're using Linux and have a supported NVIDIA GPU, you can install the GPU specific package as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

   npm install deepspeech-gpu

See the `release notes <https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases>`_ to find which GPUs are supported. Please ensure you have the required `CUDA dependency <#cuda-dependency>`_.

See the :ref:`TypeScript client <js-api-example>` for an example of how to use the bindings programatically.

.. _cli-usage:

Using the command-line client
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To download the pre-built binaries for the ``deepspeech`` command-line (compiled C++) client, use ``util/taskcluster.py``\ :

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 util/taskcluster.py --target .

or if you're on macOS:

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 util/taskcluster.py --arch osx --target .

also, if you need some binaries different than current master, like ``v0.2.0-alpha.6``\ , you can use ``--branch``\ :

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 util/taskcluster.py --branch "v0.2.0-alpha.6" --target "."

The script ``taskcluster.py`` will download ``native_client.tar.xz`` (which includes the ``deepspeech`` binary and associated libraries) and extract it into the current folder. Also, ``taskcluster.py`` will download binaries for Linux/x86_64 by default, but you can override that behavior with the ``--arch`` parameter. See the help info with ``python util/taskcluster.py -h`` for more details. Specific branches of DeepSpeech or TensorFlow can be specified as well.

Alternatively you may manually download the ``native_client.tar.xz`` from the [releases](https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases).

Note: the following command assumes you `downloaded the pre-trained model <#getting-the-pre-trained-model>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

   ./deepspeech --model deepspeech-0.7.4-models.pbmm --scorer deepspeech-0.7.4-models.scorer --audio audio_input.wav

See the help output with ``./deepspeech -h`` for more details.

Installing bindings from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If pre-built binaries aren't available for your system, you'll need to install them from scratch. Follow the :github:`native client build and installation instructions <native_client/README.rst>`.

Dockerfile for building from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We provide ``Dockerfile.build`` to automatically build ``libdeepspeech.so``, the C++ native client, Python bindings, and KenLM.
You need to generate the Dockerfile from the template using:

.. code-block:: bash

   make Dockerfile.build

If you want to specify a different DeepSpeech repository / branch, you can pass ``DEEPSPEECH_REPO`` or ``DEEPSPEECH_SHA`` parameters:

.. code-block:: bash

   make Dockerfile.build DEEPSPEECH_REPO=git://your/fork DEEPSPEECH_SHA=origin/your-branch

Third party bindings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the bindings above, third party developers have started to provide bindings to other languages:


* `Asticode <https://github.com/asticode>`_ provides `Golang <https://golang.org>`_ bindings in its `go-astideepspeech <https://github.com/asticode/go-astideepspeech>`_ repo.
* `RustAudio <https://github.com/RustAudio>`_ provide a `Rust <https://www.rust-lang.org>`_ binding, the installation and use of which is described in their `deepspeech-rs <https://github.com/RustAudio/deepspeech-rs>`_ repo.
* `stes <https://github.com/stes>`_ provides preliminary `PKGBUILDs <https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/PKGBUILD>`_ to install the client and python bindings on `Arch Linux <https://www.archlinux.org/>`_ in the `arch-deepspeech <https://github.com/stes/arch-deepspeech>`_ repo.
* `gst-deepspeech <https://github.com/Elleo/gst-deepspeech>`_ provides a `GStreamer <https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/>`_ plugin which can be used from any language with GStreamer bindings.
* `thecodrr <https://github.com/thecodrr>`_ provides `Vlang <https://vlang.io>`_ bindings. The installation and use of which is described in their `vspeech <https://github.com/thecodrr/vspeech>`_ repo.
* `eagledot <https://gitlab.com/eagledot>`_ provides `NIM-lang <https://nim-lang.org/>`_ bindings. The installation and use of which is described in their `nim-deepspeech <https://gitlab.com/eagledot/nim-deepspeech>`_ repo.

Commit message:

Add more doc text around distinction between various pre-trained model files

doc/USING.rst, after:

.. _usage-docs:

Using a Pre-trained Model
=========================

Inference using a DeepSpeech pre-trained model can be done with a client/language binding package. We have four clients/language bindings in this repository, listed below, and also a few community-maintained clients/language bindings in other repositories, listed `further down in this README <#third-party-bindings>`_.

* `The C API <c-usage>`.
* :ref:`The Python package/language binding <py-usage>`
* :ref:`The Node.JS package/language binding <nodejs-usage>`
* :ref:`The command-line client <cli-usage>`
* :github:`The .NET client/language binding <native_client/dotnet/README.rst>`

.. _runtime-deps:

Running ``deepspeech`` might, see below, require some runtime dependencies to be already installed on your system:

* ``sox`` - The Python and Node.JS clients use SoX to resample files to 16kHz.
* ``libgomp1`` - libsox (statically linked into the clients) depends on OpenMP. Some people have had to install this manually.
* ``libstdc++`` - Standard C++ Library implementation. Some people have had to install this manually.
* ``libpthread`` - On Linux, some people have had to install libpthread manually. On Ubuntu, ``libpthread`` is part of the ``libpthread-stubs0-dev`` package.  
* ``Redistribuable Visual C++ 2015 Update 3 (64-bits)`` - On Windows, it might be required to ensure this is installed. Please `download from Microsoft <https://www.microsoft.com/download/details.aspx?id=53587>`_.

Please refer to your system's documentation on how to install these dependencies.

.. _cuda-deps:

CUDA dependency
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The GPU capable builds (Python, NodeJS, C++, etc) depend on the same CUDA runtime as upstream TensorFlow. Currently with TensorFlow 2.2 it depends on CUDA 10.1 and CuDNN v7.6. `See the TensorFlow documentation <https://www.tensorflow.org/install/gpu>`_.

Getting the pre-trained model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you want to use the pre-trained English model for performing speech-to-text, you can download it (along with other important inference material) from the DeepSpeech `releases page <https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases>`_. Alternatively, you can run the following command to download the model files in your current directory:

.. code-block:: bash

   wget https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases/download/v0.7.4/deepspeech-0.7.4-models.pbmm
   wget https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases/download/v0.7.4/deepspeech-0.7.4-models.scorer

There are several pre-trained model files available in official releases. Files ending in ``.pbmm`` are compatible with clients and language bindings built against the standard TensorFlow runtime. Usually these packages are simply called ``deepspeech``. These files are also compatible with CUDA enabled clients and language bindings. These packages are usually called ``deepspeech-gpu``. Files ending in ``.tflite`` are compatible with clients and language bindings built against the `TensorFlow Lite runtime <https://www.tensorflow.org/lite/>`_. These models are optimized for size and performance in low power devices. On desktop platforms, the compatible packages are called ``deepspeech-tflite``. On Android and Raspberry Pi, we only publish TensorFlow Lite enabled packages, and they are simply called ``deepspeech``. You can see a full list of supported platforms and which TensorFlow runtime is supported at :ref:`supported-platforms-inference`.

+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Package/Model type | .pbmm               | .tflite             |
+====================+=====================+=====================+
| deepspeech         | Depends on platform | Depends on platform |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| deepspeech-gpu     | ✅                  | ❌                  |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| deepspeech-tflite  | ❌                  | ✅                  |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+

Finally, the pre-trained model files also include files ending in ``.scorer``. These are external scorers (language models) that are used at inference time in conjunction with an acoustic model (``.pbmm`` or ``.tflite`` file) to produce transcriptions. We also provide further documentation on :ref:`the decoding process <decoder-docs>` and :ref:`how language models are generated <scorer-scripts>`.

Model compatibility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

DeepSpeech models are versioned to keep you from trying to use an incompatible graph with a newer client after a breaking change was made to the code. If you get an error saying your model file version is too old for the client, you should either upgrade to a newer model release, re-export your model from the checkpoint using a newer version of the code, or downgrade your client if you need to use the old model and can't re-export it.

.. _py-usage:

Using the Python package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Pre-built binaries which can be used for performing inference with a trained model can be installed with ``pip3``. You can then use the ``deepspeech`` binary to do speech-to-text on an audio file:

For the Python bindings, it is highly recommended that you perform the installation within a Python 3.5 or later virtual environment. You can find more information about those in `this documentation <http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/dev/virtualenvs/>`_.

We will continue under the assumption that you already have your system properly setup to create new virtual environments.

Create a DeepSpeech virtual environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In creating a virtual environment you will create a directory containing a ``python3`` binary and everything needed to run deepspeech. You can use whatever directory you want. For the purpose of the documentation, we will rely on ``$HOME/tmp/deepspeech-venv``. You can create it using this command:

.. code-block::

   $ virtualenv -p python3 $HOME/tmp/deepspeech-venv/

Once this command completes successfully, the environment will be ready to be activated.

Activating the environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each time you need to work with DeepSpeech, you have to *activate* this virtual environment. This is done with this simple command:

.. code-block::

   $ source $HOME/tmp/deepspeech-venv/bin/activate

Installing DeepSpeech Python bindings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once your environment has been set-up and loaded, you can use ``pip3`` to manage packages locally. On a fresh setup of the ``virtualenv``\ , you will have to install the DeepSpeech wheel. You can check if ``deepspeech`` is already installed with ``pip3 list``.

To perform the installation, just use ``pip3`` as such:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install deepspeech

If ``deepspeech`` is already installed, you can update it as such:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install --upgrade deepspeech

Alternatively, if you have a supported NVIDIA GPU on Linux, you can install the GPU specific package as follows:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install deepspeech-gpu

See the `release notes <https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases>`_ to find which GPUs are supported. Please ensure you have the required `CUDA dependency <#cuda-dependency>`_.

You can update ``deepspeech-gpu`` as follows:

.. code-block::

   $ pip3 install --upgrade deepspeech-gpu

In both cases, ``pip3`` should take care of installing all the required dependencies. After installation has finished, you should be able to call ``deepspeech`` from the command-line.

Note: the following command assumes you `downloaded the pre-trained model <#getting-the-pre-trained-model>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

   deepspeech --model deepspeech-0.7.4-models.pbmm --scorer deepspeech-0.7.4-models.scorer --audio my_audio_file.wav

The ``--scorer`` argument is optional, and represents an external language model to be used when transcribing the audio.

See :ref:`the Python client <py-api-example>` for an example of how to use the package programatically.

.. _nodejs-usage:

Using the Node.JS / Electron.JS package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can download the JS bindings using ``npm``\ :

.. code-block:: bash

   npm install deepspeech

Please note that as of now, we support:
 - Node.JS versions 4 to 13.
 - Electron.JS versions 1.6 to 7.1

TypeScript support is also provided.

Alternatively, if you're using Linux and have a supported NVIDIA GPU, you can install the GPU specific package as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

   npm install deepspeech-gpu

See the `release notes <https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases>`_ to find which GPUs are supported. Please ensure you have the required `CUDA dependency <#cuda-dependency>`_.

See the :ref:`TypeScript client <js-api-example>` for an example of how to use the bindings programatically.

.. _cli-usage:

Using the command-line client
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To download the pre-built binaries for the ``deepspeech`` command-line (compiled C++) client, use ``util/taskcluster.py``\ :

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 util/taskcluster.py --target .

or if you're on macOS:

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 util/taskcluster.py --arch osx --target .

also, if you need some binaries different than current master, like ``v0.2.0-alpha.6``\ , you can use ``--branch``\ :

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 util/taskcluster.py --branch "v0.2.0-alpha.6" --target "."

The script ``taskcluster.py`` will download ``native_client.tar.xz`` (which includes the ``deepspeech`` binary and associated libraries) and extract it into the current folder. Also, ``taskcluster.py`` will download binaries for Linux/x86_64 by default, but you can override that behavior with the ``--arch`` parameter. See the help info with ``python util/taskcluster.py -h`` for more details. Specific branches of DeepSpeech or TensorFlow can be specified as well.

Alternatively you may manually download the ``native_client.tar.xz`` from the [releases](https://github.com/mozilla/DeepSpeech/releases).

Note: the following command assumes you `downloaded the pre-trained model <#getting-the-pre-trained-model>`_.

.. code-block:: bash

   ./deepspeech --model deepspeech-0.7.4-models.pbmm --scorer deepspeech-0.7.4-models.scorer --audio audio_input.wav

See the help output with ``./deepspeech -h`` for more details.

Installing bindings from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If pre-built binaries aren't available for your system, you'll need to install them from scratch. Follow the :github:`native client build and installation instructions <native_client/README.rst>`.

Dockerfile for building from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We provide ``Dockerfile.build`` to automatically build ``libdeepspeech.so``, the C++ native client, Python bindings, and KenLM.
You need to generate the Dockerfile from the template using:

.. code-block:: bash

   make Dockerfile.build

If you want to specify a different DeepSpeech repository / branch, you can pass ``DEEPSPEECH_REPO`` or ``DEEPSPEECH_SHA`` parameters:

.. code-block:: bash

   make Dockerfile.build DEEPSPEECH_REPO=git://your/fork DEEPSPEECH_SHA=origin/your-branch

Third party bindings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the bindings above, third party developers have started to provide bindings to other languages:


* `Asticode <https://github.com/asticode>`_ provides `Golang <https://golang.org>`_ bindings in its `go-astideepspeech <https://github.com/asticode/go-astideepspeech>`_ repo.
* `RustAudio <https://github.com/RustAudio>`_ provide a `Rust <https://www.rust-lang.org>`_ binding, the installation and use of which is described in their `deepspeech-rs <https://github.com/RustAudio/deepspeech-rs>`_ repo.
* `stes <https://github.com/stes>`_ provides preliminary `PKGBUILDs <https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/PKGBUILD>`_ to install the client and python bindings on `Arch Linux <https://www.archlinux.org/>`_ in the `arch-deepspeech <https://github.com/stes/arch-deepspeech>`_ repo.
* `gst-deepspeech <https://github.com/Elleo/gst-deepspeech>`_ provides a `GStreamer <https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/>`_ plugin which can be used from any language with GStreamer bindings.
* `thecodrr <https://github.com/thecodrr>`_ provides `Vlang <https://vlang.io>`_ bindings. The installation and use of which is described in their `vspeech <https://github.com/thecodrr/vspeech>`_ repo.
* `eagledot <https://gitlab.com/eagledot>`_ provides `NIM-lang <https://nim-lang.org/>`_ bindings. The installation and use of which is described in their `nim-deepspeech <https://gitlab.com/eagledot/nim-deepspeech>`_ repo.
